
THE TALE OF KIEU BY NGUYEN DU

INTRODUCTION
DESTINY IS ENVIOUS OF GENIUS
HEAVEN IS JEALOUS WITH BEAUTY
1. In the hundred-year span of a human life,
Talent and fate are always apt to strife.
Through experience of a harrowing change,
What we witnessed filled our hearts with tearing pain.
5. Tis not a wonder that Heaven gives then takes,
And with the fair sex He used to be jealous.
EPISODE I
DAUGHTERS OF EXCELLENT DIGNITY
SISTERS OF OUTSTANDING DECENCY
Lets open the scented book under the lamp,
An old love saga transmitted in history.
That in the Chia-Ching reign of Ming dynasty,
10. All was in peace and two capitals stable.
There once lived a man of the Vuong family,
A middle-class bourgeois of that society.
His only son and last-born child was Quan Vuong,
Who he hoped would maintain his line of scholar.
15. His first births were two magnificent daughters,
Of them Thuy Kieu elder and Thuy Van younger.
Both with apricot bodies and snow spirits,
Each had their unique style and perfect beauty.
Van looked gentle with a decent elegance,
20. Her face a full moon, her eyebrows two long arcs.
Her smile a flower and her voice sounds of jade,
Clouds yielded her hair and snow ceded her skin.
Kieu was even more attractive and charming,
Surpassing her sister in talent and beauty.
25. Eyes pure like fall lake, brows bold like spring hill,
Flowers grudged her fresh and willows craved her green.
Her glances would make a king bequeath his throne,
Her talent, like her beauty, was second to none.
Endowed with an inherent intelligence,
30. She excelled in poetry, chanting, and painting.
Well versed in pitches and fine tones of music,
She was peerless with her art of lute playing.
She herself composed the song for her singing,
A heart-tearing lyric of womans sufferings.
35. As refined and noble as the sisters were,
And though theyd reached the age of nubility,
They did stay at home behind drapes and curtains,
Without care of flirting butterflies and bees.
EPISODE II
THE ON-GRASS JUNKET
THE OWNERLESS GRAVE
Like a swallow, time shuttled so fast in spring,
40. It was beyond the sixtieth day of the season.
The young green grass spread out to the horizon,
The pear trees were speckled with some white flowers.
Now came Bright Day, a seasonal feast in March,
A grave-cleaning and on-grass walking party.
45. All round people were eager to celebrate,
And the sisters prepared to participate.
A convergence of fine men and fair ladies,
A squeezing jam of carriages and clothes.
They were coming up on the burial knolls,
50. Strewing leaves of sham gold and paper money.
Gradually the sun went down in the west sky,
The sisters regrettably left and went home.
Leisurely pacing along a rivulet,
They looked at the landscape rather delicate.
55. Here curved an indolent current of water,
There spanned a small bridge on the rivulets brinks.
By the alley appeared a flat mound of grave,
Where the grass was sadly half yellow half green.
Why is it that in the Bright-Day festival,
60. Neither incense nor smoke at this burial
Asked by his sister, Vuong Quan tried to explain:
Tis the tomb of Dam Tien, a former songstress,
Once renowned for her beauty and genius,
Host of amorous men jostled at her door.
65. But how fragile a beautys fate always was!
This heaven-scented flower broke while in bloom.
There was then a customer lured by her fame,
From a distant land for her delight he came.
But when his love boat arrived at the station,
70. The brooch had been shattered and the vase broken.
Her room was already cold and deserted,
The carriage traces had been blurred by green moss.
The unhappy lover moaned and cried his loss:
How wretched and ill-fated two of us are!
75. Because we were not destined to meet this life,
Heres my token of union in the next.
He at once acquired a coffin and a hearse,
And laid her to rest in this rose-covered grave.
Henceforth, through countless moonsets and sunrises,
80. No one come to visit this ownerless tomb.
With a sensitive heart filled with compassion,
Kieu burst out in profuse tears for the story:
How sorrowful a womans destiny is!
A damned fates always our final common lot.
85. How cruel and pitiless Creator is!
Who shrivels our youth and withers our beauty.
Alive, she played the wife of many a man,
When dead, she remains a ghost without husband.
Where are they now who once shared her sex pleasures
90. Where are they now who were her beauty cravers
Since no one cares to visit and think of her,
I would on this instant light some incense sticks,
As a proof of her meeting on my way home.
Perchance, down there in the Yellow Spring, shell know.
95. Mumbling incantations in tone high and low,
She made some bows before the tomb, then got out.
In the pale twilight loomed a field of dead weed,
And a soft breeze stirred the tassel of the reeds.
Kieu pulled down a brooch that was pinning her hair,
100. And scratched on the tree skin a four-verse poem.
She then fell into a bewitched state of mind,
She then stood immobile and dazed at her place,
She then made grim and gloomy her flower face,
Immersing in broken grief and endless tears.
105. Van said: You are truly laughable and weird,
Having extra tears to weep ancient people.
Kieu answered: Since era immemorial,
Cruel fate has never spared any woman.
Just thinking this idea makes me sick at heart,
110. I see her lie there but what will be of me
Quan interfered: What you saids very funny,
Its hard to hear your words of analogy.
Here the atmosphere is morbid and gloomy,
The suns declining and the way home still long.
115. Kieu replied: For elites of gifted talent,
Their bodies perish, but essences persist.
Im rather lucky to meet my intimate,
Lets wait and see, soon her soul will show itself.
Before could anyone answer to these words,
120. That from nowhere a whirlwind started to blow.
Violently, it felled the buds and shook the trees,
Bringing with it more or less a vague perfume.
Following the winds path, they were stunned to see,
The print of each step clearly stamped in the moss.
125. They were all terrified by what theyd just seen,
Kieu said: This isnt anything but true faith,
As heart-felt friends, were due to meet each other,
Without concern of life and death, were sisters.
In gratitude to Dam Tiens apparition,
130. Kieu added more words of appreciation.
Her heart overflowing with inspiration,
She inscribed an old-style poem at the tree foot.
EPISODE III
THE FATEFUL MEETING
THE OMINOUS DREAM
Staying or leaving, while still undecided,
The sisters heard near a sweet tune of music.
135. They looked and saw a youthful handsome scholar,
Who loosened the rein and slowly rode forward,
Carrying a half bagful of poetry,
And followed by a couple of small pageboys.
His pony was stamped with a snow-white color,
140.And his coat mixed with the tints of grass and sky.
As far as he could recognize the sisters,
He deigned to dismount and walked to their meeting.
His figured shoes gently striding in the green,
The environs sparkled like a grove of gems.
145.As an acquaintance, Vuong came out to greet him,
While the sisters, shy, hid behind the flowers.
In fact, this young man, not at all a stranger,
Was Kim Trong, a descent of noble ancestry,
A brilliant son of a wealthy family,
150. Endowed with scholarship and intelligence.
Superb were his conduct and physiognomy,
Refined and generous his ways of living.
Hed ever since lived in the same surroundings,
And had also been one of Vuong Quan schoolmates.
155. Hed heard about his neighbors celebrities,
Two beauties locked in the Bronze-Sparrow Tower.
But rivers and mountains guarded their chambers,
So he could only yearn and love in secret.
It was lucky that they met by coincidence,
160. A good chance for him to seek their confidence.
From afar, Kim had seen the sisters figures,
Spring orchid and autumn mum, lovely both were.
She- a national beauty, he- a genius,
They fell in love within, kept reserved without.
165. In a faint state of half dreaming half waking,
They were unsure about staying or leaving,
Evening shadows seemed like to induce sadness,
The guest already gone, her eyes still followed.
Under the bridge, limpid water was running,
170. Nearby, with evening shades, willows were dancing.
When Kieu returned home to her maiden chamber,
The sun had set and the dusk gongs had echoed.
A slanted moon was peeping through the window,
Gold rippled on water, trees shadowed the yard.
175. The camellia drooped on east neighbor its plant,
Dewdrops gathered and bent the swaying spring branch.
Lonely watching the face of Lady Phoebe,
Kieu was confused by near-and-far anxieties:
How could Dams fate of songstress end up like that
180. And what a waste an urban dazzling life is!
And this young man why did we meet after all
Will it end up in a life-time union
From the mixed feelings of her heart, she poured forth
A poem reflecting the mood of her being.
185. In the skewed moonlight through the window curtain,
Leaning against the sill, Kieu was slumbering.
Out of nowhere she saw appear a damsel,
A little girl, graceful and impeccable.
Face stamped with dew and body shrouded in snow,
190. She moved round, her feet like two lotus flowers.
With joy Kieu went out to welcome and asked her:
Are you coming astray from the fairy land
She said: Those of the same mood share sympathy,
We met each other this afternoon, didnt we
195. At the western side of yours, my poor house is,
Where there is running water beneath a bridge.
You had empathic heart to think of me,
And stooped to write priceless words at my retreat.
I reported all of them to the league chief,
200. Who told your name was also in the Doom Book.
As we see, thats the law of cause and effect,
Were not strangers but the same boats passengers!
Here are ten new themes just posed by the league chief,
Please write fairy verses with your flower pen.
205. Consent to the association girls bid,
With one stroke of nymph hand Kieu finished ten songs.
The girl read the poems and flattered lavishly:
What an extraordinary poetry!
Had it been put into the Doom Collection,
210. Second to none itd deserve the first trophy!
Towards the threshold the guest had turned to leave,
Kieu still kept her back for more intimate talk.
A sudden strong wind snapped the blind from nowhere,
Kieu awoke and knew shed just had a nightmare.
215. She looked around for the girl but saw no one,
Though she could still feel the lingering perfume.
All alone tossing about in the late night,
She thought of her long future, all terrified.
A flower swept by water, a weed by wind,
220. Thatd be her lot, thatd be her fate, she realized!
Endless waves of inmost feelings harassed her,
The more she thought, the more tears started to flow.
Hearing the sobs of her child in her chamber,
Her mother woke up and asked: Whats the matter
225. Why stirring and fretting late at dead of night
Behold your pear-flowered face all soaked in tears.
Kieu said: As a little daughter of yours, dear,
Nothing Ive done in return of your favors.
Strolling today, we visited Dam Tiens grave,
230. Right away, tonight, in my dream, I saw her.
What is the fate of a doomed woman, mother
She gave me subjects and I wrote into poems.
Based on what I saw in dream, I can foretell,
My future life will be as somber as hell!
235. Mother said: Those absurd dreams of groundless things,
Worth nothing to acquire griefs and sufferings
Kieu obeyed her mother and stopped worrying,
Hardly had grief left, lovesick took hold of her.
Outside the window, orioles were talking,
240. From the wall, willows blooms flew before the screen.
The moon cast its skewed light on the veranda,
Deep in thought Kieu felt lonely more than ever.
EPISODE IV
THE HOPELESS PURSUIT
THE GOD-SEND HAIRPIN
Its a common way for those sentimental,
Once theyre trapped in love, no one can unravel.
245. Since his return after meeting the sisters,
Kim couldnt a moment stop thinking of her.
Time seemed to elapse slowlier than ever,
One day of lovesickness equalled three autumns.
Layers of curtains enclosed her window like clouds,
250. He dreamed himself probing the way to her house.
Under the waned moons, beside the burned out lamps,
He longed to see her face, yearned to date her heart.
His study room icily cold like copper,
Brush stood dried in stand, lute strings lied loose on fret.
255. Winds shook the cane blind into sounds of music.
Perfume induced her breath, tea enticed her voice.
Had it not been their predestined unity,
Why did she tease him with her gorgeous beauty
Occupied with the memories of his girl,
260. And of their meeting place, he rushed to go there.
A region of luxuriant grass verdure,
By the pure brook they were to be seen nowhere!
The evening breeze seemed to rouse his sadness,
The reeds lightly shook their mocking vibration.
265. Urged by his bountiful imagination,
He decided to dash toward the Blue Bridge.
High walled and close gated was her residence,
That found him hopeless in communication.
Line of willows drooped their leaves of silk curtain,
270. An oriole chirped mockingly in the branch.
Behind those numerous bolted gates and closed doors,
Beyond that dead flower-filled yard, where was she
Stunned by the view, he stood there for a long time,
Then turned round and saw in rear another house.
275. That was Ngo Viets, an itinerant businessman,
Who was far away and the house left empty.
Posed as a lodging student, he asked to rent,
Then with his lute and books, he at once moved in.
The house was ready for him with rocks and trees,
280. With a terrace bearing the name View of Thuy.
He was glad at heart at the name coincidence,
This was, perhaps, a predestined occurrence!
Half closing the window of his rented house,
He peeped day after day at the eastern wall.
285. Being so near but almost locked out from her,
He saw not a flitting glimpse of her shadows.
Two swift rounds of moon had passed since he moved in,
Sojourning in this strange lodge in search of her.
On a serene day, it seemed, beyond the wall,
290. A gracious figure flit beneath the peach tree.
He put down his lute, tidied his gown, dashed out,
The perfume still lingered, the girld disappeared.
Walking along the wall circling the area,
He saw on the peach branch a golden hairpin.
295. Kim stretched out his hand for it and brought it home,
Thinking: Whys it here, the ladys chamber thing
This brooch of that woman would not have fallen
Into my hand without predestination!
He sat all night watching and touching the pin,
300. Which still emit a slight sandal scent of her.
As dew just cleared, a soul was seen by the wall,
Searching for something in a confused manner.
Kimd been purposely waiting for this moment,
He raised his voice through the wall to sound her heart:
305. Ive found someones hairpin accidentally,
But wheres Ho-pu to return the jewelry
Kieus lucid voice was heard from the other side:
Thank you so much for your heart honest and kind,
The hairpins worth nothing and you never mind,
310. But your righteous conscience is indeed priceless!
Kim said: We have lived for sometime as neighbors,
And Im an acquaintance of yours not stranger.
Ive got this moment thank to your perfumed thing,
That compensates for my sufferings ever since!
315. My long waiting time has been paid off today,
Let me tell you my inmost feelings, please stay.
Then he hurried inside and took out with him,
Two golden bracelets and a square silk kerchief.
With agility he climbed over the wall,
320. And there before him, the girl he met that day.
Of bashful, reserved, and timorous nature,
Before his close regard, she lowered her head.
Kim started the dialogue: Since per chance we met,
Ive been sick with my secret thirsts and longings.
325. My skinny body so withered and wasted,
That no one thought till today I could persist.
All the last months I was like a daydreamer,
Nurturing my love at the expense of my life!
Now I wish I could beg a couple of things,
330. Will you deign to look through into my poor heart
Amazed and embarassed, Kieu politely said:
Mines a stringent and pastoral family.
As to the grave matter of matrimony,
Its up to the decision of my parents.
335. Thank you for your loving and caring heart,
But Im still too young to answer your request.
Kim said: it blows today and it rains the next,
And spring days are not always within our reach.
If you dont consent to my passionate love,
340. It will hurt me but will it benefit you
First, lets make a promise of our attachment,
Then with the matchmaker Ill make arrangement.
And if heaven disapproves of my true wish,
My youth for your great love Im willing to risk.
345. But if your heart resolves to reject my love,
All my search labor comes to nothing, you know!
The lulling words of the young man soothed her ears,
The spring evening stirred the strings of her heart.
She said: In the first stage of our acquaintance,
350. For your truthful heart, its hard to hold back mine!
I appreciate your kindness and concern,
I vowed my oath of loyalty in return.
Her acceptance seemed to free his heavy heart,
Handing her the jewelry and the rose scarf,
355. He said: Our conjugal life begins today,
Please as token of trust accept these keepsakes.
Having had with her a sunflower-shaped fan,
Together with the brooch, she exchanged instantly.
While they were trading words of consistency,
360. There was hubbub of human voice from the rear.
Swift as a draft of falling leaf and flower,
He went back to his room and she her chamber.
EPISODE V
WORDS OF TENDERNESS
VOWS OF FAITHFULNESS
From time when the touchstone certified the gold,
The further in love, the deeper in sorrow.
365. This Hsiang River, a stretch of shallow water,
He waited at one end, she at the other.
A wall of fog and snow barred their mutual views,
Making it hard for them to exchange their news.
Slowly elapsed windy days and moonlit nights,
370. Rose faded and green thrived as spring was over.
On the grand moms birthday anniversary,
Her parents as well her brother and sister,
All in their new costumes and with their fine gifts,
Were at grand moms to present her their best wish.
375. Being in the deserted house left alone,
She thought today a good chance to meet her love.
Having set seasonal fruits on the table,
She hastened her lotus feet towards the wall.
Across the shrubs she lightly made her voice heard,
380. There he was, standing ready by the flowers.
He blamed her for being cool to his ardor,
And leaving their love for a time in the cold.
That had immersed him in longings and sorrows,
Making his hair half white as if mixed with snow.
385. She said: Vicious rain and wind have kept me home,
Making me unworthy of your confidence.
Its lucky today everyone is absent,
I come with my heart to appreciate yours.
They went skirting around a man-made mountain,
390. At the walls end was a newly fenced entrance.
Rolling up sleeves Kim unlocked the love haven,
Splitting clouds they looked into the fairyland.
They gazed at one anothers shining faces,
Exchanging their words of health and happiness.
395. Shoulder by shoulder they entered his study,
While trading their vows of love and loyalty.
On the desk were brush and sheets of poetry,
On the wall hung an ink picture of pine trees,
That betrayed the real expression of nature.
400. Admiringly she praised the lively drawing.
He said: This sketch of picture is just finished,
Please give it more value by adding a note.
The nymph hand of hers, as swift as wind and rain,
Brandished the brush and scribbled a four-verse poem.
405. He praised: Your talent of gem and pearl poetry,
Is unmatched even by Ladies Pan and Hsieh.
Were I not a good person in previous life,
I wouldntve been awarded with this high prize!
She replied: By but a glance at your clear face,
410. I could recognize youre a man of high worth.
I think myself but a girl of petty fate,
Will heaven agree to our love consummate
I remember when still an innocent child,
There came a physiognomist who looked and said:
415. This girls quintessence all reveals visibly,
A life of genius trapped in a tragic fate.
Weighing your good lot and my bad destiny,
I doubt if our love ends up in unity
He said: Our fortuitous meeting is destined,
420. To date, many times mens will has won gods wish.
Even if the worst happens to our marriage,
Well duly risk ourselves to keep our promise!
All of their innermost feelings once relieved,
Their hearts filled with love, their heads tipsy with wine.
425. Happy days were all shorter than a hand span,
The sun had hid its mirror behind the mount.
Uneasy to stay thinking of her vacant house,
She said goodbye and left for her residence.
When she got home, her mom and dad were not there,
430. Still taking part in grand moms birthday night feast.
In a rush, she lowered the doors silk curtain,
And hastened her pace towards the midnight garden.
The moon was glimmering on tops of the trees,
A lamp peeping through the blind of his study.
435. Kim was dozing off, leaning on the table,
In a state of half awake and half asleep.
Her footsteps aborted his fantasy sleep,
Then in the late moonbeam, the pear bloom approached.
Dazed as being on the peak of ecstasy,
440. He thought of having a honeymoon fancy.
Despite the empty and lonely night, Said she,
My heart urges me to come in search of yours.
Now, we are clearly face-to-face together,
Who knows it will be but a dream tomorrow
445. Overjoyed, he rushed out to invite her in,
And lighted more candle, added more incense.
They jointly wrote down a page of troth promise,
Cut their hairs, mixed and shared them with a gold knife.
Then by witness of the bright moon in the sky,
450. They solemnly reiterated their oaths,
And painstakingly recommended their hearts,
That their unanimity should be for life.
EPISODE VI
THE FOREBODING MOURNFUL MUSIC
THE RESPECTFUL RIGHTEOUS LANGUAGE
In cups of jade, they then drank their pledging wine,
Their perfumes mixed and their shadows coalesced.
455. He said: the wind is cool, the moon transparent,
Anyhow I still feel my heart uneasy.
As Ive not yet crossed the Blue Bridge for marriage,
My insistence might become an insolence.
She said: Were tied together by thread of fate,
460. One word exchanged and we became intimates.
Except improper and indecent requests,
Any other thing for you I wont regret.
Was told youre a famous lute player, he said.
My Chung Chis ears craves to enjoy your music.
465. She replied: My humble skill is worth nothing,
But you have ordered and I have to give in.
On the wall was readily hung a moon-lute
At once Kim gallantly handed it to her.
She said: This private and petty art of mine,
470. Why you so occupied for this knack so trite!
She began by tuning the strings of the lute,
Adjusting them in accord with the tone scales.
Her music revived the Han-Chus Battlefields,
Where iron and gold arms were heard colliding.
475. Another air was the Su-mas Phoenix Plea,
Wherein woes and sorrows were heard lamenting.
Here Chi Kangs masterpiece entitled Kuang-ling,
Where water was heard running and cloud erring.
There the Crossing the Border Gate by Chao-Chun,
480. Lovesick for her king and homesick for her folks.
The sounds were clear as a flying herons cries,
Thick as the brooks water falling from above.
Slow as the breeze slightly wafting from outside,
Or speedy as the storm rumbling from the sky.
485. The lamp became dim or bright at intervals,
As he sat there submerged in reeling sadness.
At times he bowed his head or leaned on his knees,
At times he scowled from pain or frowned for pity.
At last he said: your musics really gorgeous,
490. But hearing it, I feel like gulping sourness!
Why do you choose those mournful airs of music,
That depress your heart and sadden the others.
She said: It has been my accustomed nature,
Whether sad or glad, it is an endowed mood!
495. I highly appreciate your golden words,
And hope my flaws will gradually reduce.
Her perfumed body gave off the charisma,
Her eyes and smile seemed to sparkle with love fire.
Kim felt like a skewed boat on waves of desire,
500. And in his cuddle were mixed some pleas of lust.
Gravely she said: never play with love, you must,
At least, let me finish what I want to speak!
A small girl like me is not worth your concern,
And peach grove dare not fence itself from blue birds.
505. But as Im honored to be your future wife,
I must uphold the ethics of chastity.
Behave I like a lass without purity,
Then no one would wed such a person as me.
Since were not temporary sexual partners,
510. So my lifes chastity cant be lost in hours!
Lets review the well-famed love in history,
There were the unequalled well-matched Chang and Tsui.
Sexual pleasures aborted their golden pledge,
Over-indulgence made him tired of her.
515. Even when they were side by side together,
He harbored in his heart a somewhat contempt.
As a result their western-roofed oath cooled down,
And their happy idyll turned out bitterness.
Cause she did not refuse his undue requests,
520. That later she had to live in his disgrace.
Please dont press me to any corporal deed,
Ill submit to you at right time what you need! 
Hearing this gentle but serious language,
He more than ever valued and treasured her.
525. The moonbeam had just faded on the roof s eaves,
From outside the door was heard a messenger.
Kieu hurried back towards her maiden chamber,
As his lover stepped out into the peach yard.
As soon he opened the door of his dwelling,
530. A servant came in bringing his homes tidings.
The ominous sad news of his uncles death,
His coffin was to be brought home from Liao-yang,
An alien remote land barred by dales and hills,
Dad called Kim back to help in the obsequies.
535. What a terrifying event this news was!
He quickly made a short cut to her chamber.
And the entire story thoroughly told her,
Of his familys mourning and his own woes:
Our affairs not yet been in detail discussed,
540. Our love not yet been officially promised,
The moon of oath still there truthful and unchanged,
Never will my heart change due to long distance.
Beyond thousand miles, moment last into months,
So its a long time for our sorrows to end!
545. Please, my love, take good care of your priceless health,
So Ill be at ease at the far horizon.
Hearing these words, entangled with confusion,
In an uncertain mood she expressed her thoughts:
God of nuptials, why do you hate two of us,
550. Union yet enjoyed, partition now suffered!
Together weve already sworn the grave oath,
That though our hairs alter our hearts will never.
In spite of long months and years, Ill wait for you,
Weeping alone at the thought of your hardships.
555. Ive pledged to you my hearts unanimity,
That means Ive sworn my eternal loyalty.
As long as river and mountain still exist,
Remember to come back to me, my cherished!
They were so attached and had no heart to part,
560. While the sun had been right at the house corner.
Each step of parting imparted fits of pains,
Each word of farewell incited lines of tears.
Quickly saddling his horse and bearing his bag,
Sharing with her the journey and the sadness,
565. He grimly looked at the alien scenery,
Cuckoos crowed on tree, geese disbanded in sky;
He felt sad for her withdrawn from society,
And burdened under the heavy load of lovesick.
EPISODE VII
THE CORRUPTED CONSTABLES EXTORTED
THE GRATEFUL DAUGHTER SOLD HERSELF
Meanwhile she was standing against the west porch,
570. Her heart twisted as if entangled with silks.
She beheld through window the whirling dark clouds,
Pale like sick flower, sad like yellow willow.
Soullessly she took a walk onto the house,
Whereas the birthday goers were returning.
575. Hardly had she and her folks finished their greeting,
They saw around appear noisy constables.
The ones holding sticks, others seizing large knives;
Acting boisterously, a group of demon-likes,
They put cangues on the old man and his young son,
580. And with one brute rope fastened these two persons.
Their sounds, like buzz of green-flies, filled the household,
Horrifying the sisters and their mother.
All the households jewelry and belongings,
Were thoroughly sacked into their greed-pockets.
585. The charge of some wrong was imposed on their heads,
Who was the trapper Who was the slanderer
Asking the questions and they had the answer:
The denouncer: a rogue of raw silk seller.
The family was terrified and spellbound,
590. Their woeful cries shook the earth and blurred the clouds.
They prostrated and begged all day for mercy,
To be heard by deaf ears and rough hands only.
They hang father and son upturned on the beam,
Even rocks were crushed to pieces, much less men.
595. Watching the scene, Kieu felt a heart-tearing pain,
This wrong, she could only to Heaven complain.
Since it was a habit of those cop-villains,
To wreak dire havoc for the sake of money.
How could I do, she thought, to save my blood folks
600. In emergency, we act accordingly.
The love for young Kim, the labor of father,
Love and duty, which one is the heavier
Ill put aside the solemn vows of my love,
A child must first return the parents favors.
605. Thus resolutely she took the decision:
Let me sell myself for dads ransom money!
There was mister Chung an old functionary,
Who worked for the police too, but a kind man.
Before her filial gratitude and love,
610. He conceived for her a hidden compassion.
Counting all the likely bribes and offerings,
Three hundred liangs would satisfy everything.
He told her, while her kin kept in transient jail,
To manage for the sum in two or three days.
615. What a pity for her, a girl young and naive,
Carried into a sudden calamity!
The heart pain of her households adversity,
Even life she did not regret, much less love!
As a raindrop without care of its mean fate,
620. Shed sacrifice her life to save her fathers.
She revealed her hearts wish to the matchmaker,
And that news stirred noisy gossip near and far.
There was now in the near town an old woman,
Who led a guest to the interrogation.

XXX. EPILOGUE
NEVER RELY ON TALENT
IMPROVE TOWARDS GOODNESS
Hence everything is predestined by Heaven,
Who creates man and allots him to a fate.
If yours a drifting fate, be resigned to it,
If yours a noble fate, be complied with it.
3245. Heavens never in favor of anyone,
Who is bestowed with both talent and fortune.
Those with talent, dont ever brag your talent,
Because talent rhymes its end with accident.
Since all of us are burdened with a karma,
3250. Let us not blame heaven for our destiny.
The nature of goodness derives from our heart,
Therefore the heart is worthwhile thrice the talent.
Above are rustic words from my experience,
I hope they could entertain you at night times.
November 2010
MAC PHI HOANG
